                     CONCORDIA UNIVERSITY 
                        DEPARTMENT OF  
              COMPUTER SCIENCE AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING 
       COMP 6231, Winter 2026         Instructor: R. Jayakumar 
                          PROJECT 
       Issued: Mar. 10, 2026              Due: Apr. 8, 2026 
               Software Failure Tolerant and/or Highly Available  
               Distributed Vehicle Reservation Management System 
       In this project, you are going to enhance either the CORBA implementation (developed in 
       Assignment  2)  or  the  webservice  implementation  (developed  in  Assignment  3)  of  the 
       Distributed Vehicle Reservation Management System (DSMS) to be software failure tolerant 
       and/or highly available under process crash failure using process replication. There are two 
       projects (each team has to select and implement one of the two), suitable for teams of 3 or 4 
       students, as described in the following.  
        
                      Project 1 (for teams of 3) 
                Software Failure Tolerant or Highly Available 
               Distributed Vehicle Reservation Management System 
       For  this  project,  extend  your  Distributed  Vehicle  Reservation  Management  System 
       implementation from Assignment 2 or Assignment 3 to tolerate either a single software (non-
       malicious Byzantine) failure or be highly available under a single process crash failure using 
       active replication. Your implementation should be capable of providing either of the required 
       features (software failure tolerance or highly availability) by selecting the feature when the 
       server system is initialized. That is, your server implementation must have the necessary 
       code to tolerate a software failure and be highly available in case of a crash failure and use 
       the appropriate code depending on the failure mode selected when the server is initialized.  
       Your  actively  replicated  DSMS  server  system  should  have  at  least  three  replicas  each 
       running a different implementation (in different hosts). Each replica has a Replica Manager 
       (RM) which detects and recovers from a failure. You need to implement a front end (FE) 
       which receives a client request and forwards it to a failure-free sequencer.  The sequencer 
       assigns a unique sequence number and reliably multicasts the request to all the replicas. In 
       order to handle a software failure or for high availability, the three replicas execute client 
       requests in total order and return the results back to the FE which in turn returns a single 
       correct result back to the client as soon as two identical (correct) results are received from 
       the replicas. If any one of the replicas produces incorrect result, the FE informs all the RMs 
       about that replica.  If the same replica produces incorrect results for three consecutive client 
       requests, then the RMs replace that replica with another correct one. If the FE does not 
       receive the result from a replica within a reasonable amount of time (say, twice the time 
       taken for the slowest result so far), it suspects that replica may have crashed and informs all 
       the RMs of the potential crash.  The RMs then check the replica that did not produce the 
       result and replace it with another working replica if they agree among themselves that the 
       replica has crashed. Since the entire server system (replicas, sequencer, FE, and RM) usually 
       runs on a local area network, the server replicas, sequencer, FE, and RM communicate among 
               COMP 6231 (Distributed System Design), Winter 2026 4 Project                              Page 2 
                
               themselves using the unreliable UDP protocol. However, this communication should be made 
               reliable in order to avoid message loss. Specifically do the following. 
               "   (Team) Assuming that server failure could be due to either a single software bug (non-
                   malicious Byzantine failure) or a single process crash (selected at server initialization), 
                   design your actively replicated server system. 
               "   (Each Student) Modify the server implementation from the assignment so that it can work 
                   as a server replica.  A server replica receives the client requests with sequence numbers 
                   and FE information from the sequencer, executes the client requests in total order 
                   according to the sequence number and sends the result back to the FE. 
               "   (Student 1) Design and implement the front end (FE) which receives a client request, 
                   forwards the request to the sequencer, receives the results from the replicas and sends a 
                   single correct result back to the client as soon as possible. The FE also informs all the 
                   RMs of a possibly failed replica that produced incorrect result.  
               "   (Student 2) Design and implement the replica manager (RM) which creates and initializes 
                   the actively replicated server system. The RM also implements the failure detection and 
                   recovery for the required type of failure.  
               "   (Student 3) Design and implement a failure-free sequencer which receives a client request 
                   from a FE, assigns a unique sequence number to the request and reliably multicast the 
                   request with the sequence number and FE information to all the three server replicas. 
               "   (Team)  Integrate  all  the  modules  properly,  deploy  your  application  on  a  local  area 
                   network, and test the correct operation of your application using properly designed test 
                   runs. You may simulate a software failure by returning a random result and a process 
                   crash by killing that process while the application is running. 
                
                                                 Project 2 (for teams of 4) 
                                   Software Failure Tolerant and Highly Available  
                                Distributed Vehicle Reservation Management System 
               This project is almost the same as Project 1 with the added requirement that your system 
               should be able to work correctly when both a software failure and a process crash occur 
               simultaneously. Thus, the type of failure is not selected when the server system is initialized; 
               rather, the server detects and recovers from both types of failures all the time.  In order to do 
               this, your replicated server should have four replicas working as described in Project 1. 
               Specifically do the following. 
               "   (Team) Assuming that a single crash failure and a single software failure (Byzantine 
                   failure) can occur simultaneously, design your active replication scheme using process 
                   group replication and reliable group communication.  
               "   (Each Student) Modify the server implementation from the assignment so that it can work 
                   as a server replica.  A server replica receives the client requests with sequence numbers 
                   and FE information from the sequencer, executes the client requests in total order 
                   according to the sequence number and sends the result back to the FE.  
               "   (Student 1) Design and implement the front end (FE) which receives a client request, 
                   forwards the request to the sequencer, receives the results from the replicas and sends a 
               COMP 6231 (Distributed System Design), Winter 2026 4 Project                              Page 3 
                
                   single correct result back to the client as soon as possible. The FE also informs all the 
                   RMs of a possibly failed replica that produced incorrect result.  
               "   (Student 2) Design and implement the replica manager (RM) which creates and initializes 
                   the actively replicated server subsystem. The RM also implements the failure detection 
                   and recovery for both types of failures.  
               "   (Student 3) Design and implement a failure-free sequencer which receives a client request 
                   from the FE, assigns a unique sequence number to the request and reliably multicast the 
                   request with the sequence number and FE information to all the four server replicas. 
               "   (Student 4) Design proper test cases for all possible failure situations and implement a 
                   client program to run these test cases. 
               "   (Team)  Integrate  all  the  modules  properly,  deploy  your  application  on  a  local  area 
                   network, and test the correct operation of your application. You may simulate a process 
                   crash by killing that process while the application is running and a software failure by 
                   returning a random result. 
                
                                             Timeline and Marking Scheme 
               Before implementation, you should submit your design documentation by Monday, March 25, 
               2026, and get the TA9s approval. This is a DESIGN project; if you implement a bad design, 
               even though it may work, you9ll still lose up to 50% of the marks.  
                
               [30%]  Design Documentation (by group). Due by Monday, March 23, 2026. 
                   "   [20%] Describe and explain your design and architecture clearly, including theories 
                       (protocol, algorithm) you apply, how to implement, and also describe dataflow (how 
                       your modules interact/cooperate with each other to achieve the function). 
                   "   [10%] Design proper and sufficient test scenarios, which should include testing data 
                       and results.  
                   "   Please indicate the student ID of each student, the module that student is responsible 
                       for and how that module is designed and integrated. 
                   "   Keep the documentation ready to display and discuss during your demo. 
                
               [70%]  Demo. Tuesday, April 14, 2026. 
                   "   Please select your preferred demo time (20 minutes per group) in advance. There is 
                       no instant registration during the demo week, so if you cannot register before demo 
                       week, you will lose 40% of the mark. 
                   "   Make sure your application can work on a network (you may use workstations from a 
                       lab) during demo; otherwise you9ll lose 70% of the mark. There will be no second 
                       chance. 
                   "   [50%] For group demo: 
                       ÷  Introduce your application architecture. 
                       ÷  Demo your designed testing scenarios to illustrate the correctness of your design. 
                          If your testing scenarios do not cover all possible issues, you9ll lose part of mark 
                          up to 40%. 
               COMP 6231 (Distributed System Design), Winter 2026 4 Project                              Page 4 
                
                   "   [20%] For individual demo: 
                       ÷  Introduce  the  module  you  are  responsible  for  and  answer  questions  on  your 
                          module. 
                        
                                                       QUESTIONS 
                
               If you are having difficulties understanding any aspect of this assignment, feel free to contact 
                                                                      ). It is strongly recommended that you 
               your teaching assistant (b_p93894@live.concordia.ca
               attend the lab sessions, as various aspects of the assignment will be covered there. 
